---
title: The one where it all began
date: 2020-06-16
---

This post feels like it was a long time coming. I've been wanting to start
writing regularly for, well, a really, really long time. It's something that
I've always imagined myself doing but for the longest time I just felt stuck.

While I was going through the process of revising this site, I realized that I
forgot how much work goes into making what is visually an incredibly simple
website. And, honestly, I think this was a big reason why I felt stuck for so
long.

The other big reason is that it just wasn't that important for me. This seems so
obvious outside of my internal self. Still, it feels important to name this and
accept it so I can move forward.

## Looking back

Looking back through the years, this has been an activity that I've always
_thought_ about doing. There have even been some times where I've gone through
the same exercise I did before this post but, still, things just didn't happen.

Part of me thinks that this is just due to time and attention, but the other
part is starting to accept that this was a trade-off I was making throughout my
life. This trade-off may have been intentional, but it honestly doesn't seem
like it. At the end of the day, I was committing too much of myself to my work
and not enough time to myself.

That in and of itself can be a dangerous spiral to fall into. Things start to
normalize real quick. Working past 5, coding on the weekends, even just thinking
through the things I was doing on the job outside of work hours are all ways
that work just bled into my life.

At the end of the day, this stuff had a cost. Sometimes this cost manifests
itself in relationships, other times with interests or goals, often times all of
the above. The worst part about this is without the time to reflect, or friends
who you trust, recognizing these patterns and being intentional about moving
past them is incredibly challenging.

## What does it look like to move on?

Right now in 2020, there is a lot of time you can spend thinking about oneself.
For me, this time has prompted some action around gathering clarity for what I
want moving forward. Including answering some of the end-all, be-all questions
of life like what do I _actually_ want to be doing right now.

Other parts of this are things I never would have thought of before going to
therapy regularly over the past year. Things like acceptance without judgement
can go such a long way. Being curious and honest are great at moving past road
blocks if you're open to it.

How these things were manifested for me through this site are through noticing
all the obstacles that come up while building a site. Even with a site as simple
as the one you're reading, there were so, so many decisions involved. And
honestly I forgot this about building sites by yourself. And it can feel very
hard and discouraging when all you want is to write.

Yet, when I say that I wanted to write clearly what I meant in the past was that
I wanted to write these huge editorial posts. Things that you would read and
feel like your brain has changed how it thinks afterwards.

Obviously, if you go from not writing at all to wanting to write 10-20min long
editorials you're most likely setting yourself up for failure. And that's all it
took for me not to write for so long.

The big turning point for me in 2020 was reading Joel Hook's
[Stop Giving af and Start Writing More](https://joelhooks.com/on-writing-more).
I think it hit on everything that I was noticing about myself and how I viewed
this space and my work. If anything that I shared about above that I was
struggling with resonated with you, I highly recommend checking it out. It
kick-started this whole thing, and I really hope it keeps going.

## Final thoughts

At the end of this first post, I think what I feel the most is excited. And
optimistic. Even though things might not have turned out the way I wanted them
to in the past, I'm still hopeful for the future. And that, to me, is something
worth fighting for.

<br>

Till next time -- Josh
